@example
build-prc [ -l ] [ -L ] [ -t @var{type} ] @var{prcfile} @var{app-name} @var{crid} @var{file}@dots{}

build-prc [ -o @var{file} | --output @var{file} ]
          [ -a @var{file} | --appinfo @var{file} ]
          [ -s @var{file} | --sortinfo @var{file} ]
          [ -l ] [ -L ] [ -H | --hack ]
          [ -t @var{type} | --type @var{type} ]
          [ -c @var{crid} | --creator @var{crid} ]
          [ -n @var{name} | --name @var{name} ]
          [ -m @var{num} | --modification-number @var{num} ]
          [ -v @var{num} | --version-number @var{num} ]
          [ --read-only ] [ --appinfo-dirty ] [ --backup ]
          [ --ok-to-install-newer ] [ --reset-after-install ]
          [ --copy-prevention ] [ --stream ] [ --hidden ]
          [ --launchable-data ] [ --recyclable ] [ --bundle ]
          [ -z @var{n} | --compress-data @var{n} ]
          [ --no-check-header ] [ --no-check-resources ]
          [ --no-check ]
          @var{file}@dots{}
@end example

@code{build-prc} reads resources from the input files given and
combines them into one output Palm OS .prc resource data file.  There are
two styles of build-prc command line:  in the old style, the first three
non-option arguments describe the output file, and input files don't start
until the fourth argument.  In the new style, all non-option arguments
are input files.  An invocation is new-style if the first file argument
does not have a .prc extension or if the @code{-o} option is used.

Input files are identified by their extension:

@table @code
@item @var{fname}.def
A project definition file, which controls the post-linking process.
If your project uses a definition file, there can be only one and it
must be first in the list of input files.  (Hence definition files can
only be used in a new-style invocation.)

@item @var{type}@var{nnnn}.bin
@itemx @var{type}@var{nnnn}.@var{progname}.grc
A raw binary resource file (the .grc style filename is produced
by obj-res).  The contents of a raw file are added to the output as
a @code{@var{type} #@var{nnnn}} resource, where @var{nnnn} is in hexadecimal.

@item  @var{fname}.prc
@itemx @var{fname}.ro
A resource database in @code{.prc} format.  The contents of all the
resources in a resource database are copied to the output database.
(The information in the input database's header---name, creator, flags,
etc---is entirely ignored.)

@item @var{progname}
Files with no extensions are treated as bfd executables.  If a bfd
executable contains either a @code{.disposn} or a @code{.trap} section,
its @code{.text} section is converted to a stand-alone code resource
accordingly (@pxref{Stand-alone code}).  Otherwise, its code and data
sections are converted to resources according to a definition
file, or, if there is no definition file, as if the @code{application}
project kind was specified.
@end table

By default, @code{build-prc} uses its first non-option argument as
the filename for its output .prc file.  In an old-style command line,
@var{prcfile} is used as is.  In a new-style command line, the output
filename is formed by removing the extension, if any, from the first
file argument and appending `.prc'.

@table @code
@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output @var{file}
Write the .prc output to @var{file}.  It is an error to use this
option in an old-style command line, as it conflicts with the mandatory
@var{prcfile} argument.

@item -a @var{file}
@itemx --appinfo @var{file}
Add an AppInfo block with the contents of @var{file} to the database.

@item -s @var{file}
@itemx --sortinfo @var{file}
Add a SortInfo block with the contents of @var{file} to the database.

@item -l
Build a GLib shared library; this is equivalent to specifying a project
kind of ``glib'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the
default database type and the disposition of code and data sections in
the bfd executable, and influences resource checking.

@item -L
Build a system shared library; this is equivalent to specifying a project
kind of ``syslib'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the
default database type and the disposition of code (and data) sections in
the bfd executable, and influences resource checking.

@item -H
@itemx --hack
Build a HackMaster hack; this is equivalent to specifying a project kind
of ``hack'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the default
database type, requires all bfd executables to be marked as stand-alone,
and influences resource checking.

@item -t @var{type}
@itemx --type @var{type}
Set the database's type to @var{type}, overriding any type it may get from
a definition file or elsewhere.

Note that this affects @emph{only} the type recorded in the database
header; in particular, it does not change build-prc's notion of the kind
of project being generated (@pxref{Definition files, project kinds}), nor
does it influence resource checking.  If you do not want the database to
be checked as if it is an application, you must either tell build-prc what
it @emph{really} is, by using a definition file or one of the options
listed above, or, as a last resort, suppress resource checking entirely.

@item -c @var{crid}
@itemx --creator @var{crid}
Set the database's creator ID to @var{crid}, overriding any ID it may get
from a definition file.  It is an error to use this option in an old-style
command line, as it conflicts with the mandatory @var{crid} argument.

@item -n @var{name}
@itemx --name @var{name}
Set the database's name to @var{name}, overriding any name it may get from
a definition file.  It is an error to use this option in an old-style command
line, as it conflicts with the mandatory @var{app-name} argument.

@item -m @var{num}
@itemx --modification-number @var{num}
Set the modification number in the database header to @var{num}.

@item -v @var{num}
@itemx --version-number @var{num}
Set the database header version number to @var{num}.

@item  --read-only
@itemx --appinfo-dirty
@itemx --backup
@itemx --ok-to-install-newer
@itemx --reset-after-install
@itemx --copy-prevention
@itemx --stream
@itemx --hidden
@itemx --launchable-data
@itemx --recyclable
@itemx --bundle
Set the corresponding database header attribute, adding to any attributes
set in a definition file.  These options may also be spelt without the
internal hyphens (@code{--readonly}, etc).

@item -z @var{N}
@itemx --compress-data @var{N}
Compress the data resource, `data #0'.  Compression ranges from 0, no
compression, to 7, full (and somewhat experimental!) compression.

@item --no-check-header
Suppress warnings related to invalid database header fields, such as a blank
database name or creator ID.  If the database being generated is only for
use as a temporary file, for example, these warnings may not be of interest.

@item --no-check-resources
Suppress checking for the presence of vital resources.  Databases
corresponding to particular kinds of project are malformed if they do not
contain certain resources:  for example, an application without a `code #1'
resource cannot be launched correctly, and a Hack requires `TRAP' resources
to be numbered consecutively and to have corresponding `code' resources.

By default, build-prc will check for these resources and emit diagnostics
accordingly, which helps you detect mistakes such as the omission of a bfd
executable from the build-prc invocation.

@item --no-check
Suppress all checking of the generated database; this is equivalent to using
all of the @code{--no-check-@var{foo}} options listed above.
@end table
