\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename prc-tools.info
@settitle Using PRC-Tools
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@ifset development-version
@clear version
@c This doesn't read very well, but should never appear anyway
@set version  as in current development
@end ifset

@ifinfo
@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* prc-tools: (prc-tools).      Using GCC et al with Palm OS.
@end direntry
@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* build-prc: (prc-tools)build-prc.              The Palm OS post-linker.
* palmdev-prep: (prc-tools)palmdev-prep.        Preparing PalmDev trees.
@end direntry

This file documents the use of PRC-Tools, version @value{version}.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Using PRC-Tools
@subtitle Compiling for Palm OS with GCC
@subtitle For version @value{version}
@subtitle @value{updatedmonth}
@author

@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 2001, 2002 John Marshall@*
Portions copyright @copyright{} 2000 Palm, Inc. or its subsidiaries

@sp 2
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@c Yes, we really did mean to leave that as FSF!

@end titlepage


@node Top
@top Using PRC-Tools

This manual documents the extra tools and particular caveats associated
with using the GNU Compiler Collection, GCC, to compile programs for Palm OS.
@ifclear development-version
It corresponds to prc-tools @w{version @value{version}},
@end ifclear
@ifset development-version
It corresponds to the current pre-release development version of prc-tools
(so some functionality described may not be present in earlier releases),
@end ifset
and was last modified on @value{updatedfull}.


@menu
* GCC on Palm OS::    Features (and mis-features) specific to Palm OS.
* Global data::       Accessing global data.
* Special projects::  Large applications, libraries, stand-alone code, etc.
* Definition files::  Using a project definition file.
* Debugging::         Enabling and using a debugger.

* Post-linker and other tools::

@detailmenu
* build-prc::         Combine resources into a single .prc database.
* multigen::          Generate support files for multiple code resources.
* stubgen::             ...or for shared libraries.
* obj-res::           Make resources from a bfd executable.
* palmdev-prep::      Inform GCC of the locations of Palm OS SDKs.
* trapfilt::          Decode Palm OS trap vectors.
@end detailmenu

@c * Index::
@end menu


@node GCC on Palm OS
@chapter Palm OS-specific GCC features

The modifications to GCC to support Palm OS programming add several new
command line options and function attributes to GCC.  Additionally, a
few standard GCC features are not supported.

@menu
* New options::
* Function attributes::
* Unsupported GCC features::
* Include files::
@end menu


@node New options
@section Palm OS-specific GCC options

GCC for Palm OS supports the following options, in addition to all the
usual target-independent and M68K-specific options.

@table @code
@item -mpcrel
Activate Palm OS-specific code generation patterns.  This is turned on
by default in the specs file; don't ever turn it off!

@item -mdebug-labels
Put each function's name into the text section immediately after the function's
code, in MacsBug format.

@item -mextralogues
Activate @code{extralogue} attributes.  @xref{Entry points}.

@item -mown-gp
Access global data via the @sc{a4} register, and activate @code{owngp}
attributes.  By default, global data are accessed via @sc{a5}, and
@code{owngp} attributes have no effect.  @xref{Global data}.

This option implies @samp{-mextralogues}.

@item -palmos@var{N}
Select system header files and libraries for Palm OS SDK version @var{N}.
By default, the SDK selected as the default SDK the last time
@code{palmdev-prep} was run will be used (@pxref{palmdev-prep}).

@item -palmos-none
Don't add any Palm OS SDK directories or other directories from any PalmDev
trees to the include and library search paths.
@end table

There is also a @samp{-mno-@var{X}} option corresponding to each of the
@samp{-m@var{X}} options, but you shouldn't ever need to use them.


@node Function attributes
@section Function attributes

You specify a function attribute in the declaration of the function.
In addition to the standard ones (@pxref{Function Attributes, attributes,
Declaring Attributes of Functions, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}), Palm OS
defines the following function attributes:

@table @code
@item callseq (@var{insns})
A function with a @code{callseq} attribute is called using the assembly
language instructions in @var{insns}, which may implement a Palm OS systrap
or something more esoteric.  The argument @var{insns} must be a string
literal.

Generally you won't use the @code{callseq} attribute directly; instead, there
are macros defined in @file{PalmTypes.h}.

@item systrap (@var{vector})
The @code{systrap} attribute specifies that the function should be called
using the Palm OS systrap mechanism.  The integer @var{vector} may be either
a literal such as @samp{0xa000} or a constant value such as an enumeration
constant.  More complicated expressions are not permitted.

This attribute is deprecated and will be removed from a future version of
prc-tools.  New code should use callseq instead.

You shouldn't use the @code{systrap} attribute directly; instead, you should
use the @code{SYS_TRAP} macro defined in @file{CoreTraps.h}.

@item owngp
When @samp{-mown-gp} is used, the @code{owngp} attribute causes the function
to save the @sc{a4} register on entry, and restore it on exit.

You shouldn't use @code{owngp} directly; instead, you should use the macros
defined in @file{EntryPoints.h}.

@item extralogue (@var{prologue}, @var{epilogue},@dots{})
When @samp{-mextralogues} is used, the @code{extralogue} attribute causes
the function to add code to its prologue and epilogue according to the
arguments given.  @xref{Entry points}, for details.

You shouldn't use @code{extralogue} directly; instead, you should use the
macros defined in @file{EntryPoints.h}.

@item section (@var{section-name})
This attribute is a standard one, and is used on Palm OS to indicate
functions which should be placed in a code resource other than the default
@samp{code #1}.

@c You probably shouldn't use @code{section} directly; instead, you might define
@c your own macros for different sections.
@end table

In theory, the commonly used attributes differ in their ``required
visibilities'':

@itemize @bullet
@item
A @code{systrap} or @code{callseq} attribute is only important to anyone
calling the function.  (You don't usually define such functions yourself
anyway.)

@item
Callers don't care that a function has an @code{extralogue} or saves its
@code{owngp}; these really only have effects when the code for that function
is generated.

@item
On Palm OS, a function's @code{section} is important both to itself (it
determines what section the code is put in) and to other functions calling
it (it can cause a special cross-section calling sequence to be emitted).
@end itemize

In practice, probably the best policy is to have exactly one declaration
for each function that needs one, in a header file somewhere, and to use
@samp{-Wimplicit} (which is implied by @samp{-Wall}), and possibly also
@samp{-Wmissing-declarations}, to ensure that the declaration is visible
when it needs to be (@pxref{Warning Options, warnings, Options to Request
or Suppress Warnings, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}).


@node Unsupported GCC features
@section Unsupported GCC features

The following GCC options are not currently supported on Palm OS:

@table @code
@item -p
@itemx -pg
@itemx -a
@itemx -ax
@itemx -fprofile-arcs
@itemx -fbranch-probabilities
Probably profiling is unsupported.  Certainly the support functions in
@file{libgcc} aren't being included, because they depend on non-existent
stdio support.

@item -ftest-coverage
A similar comment applies to the @code{gcov} data file.

@item -ffunction-sections
This option sets each function's section @emph{after} function calls are
generated.  This is too late to be effective because we need to emit special
code for cross-section function calls.

@item -mbitfield
@itemx -m68020
@itemx -m68881
These and other M68K hardware selection options will cause your programs
to fail horribly.

@item -mrtd
This selects code generation patterns which disagree with the conventions
used by the Palm OS API functions, so will fail horribly.
@end table

@noindent
There are also the following caveats:

@itemize @bullet
@item
While describing the @code{section} attribute, the GCC manual suggests using
the linker to split an executable into sections.  Just like
@samp{-ffunction-sections}, this doesn't work.

@item
The @code{__complex__} extension doesn't work.

@item
The @samp{-Wmultichar} warning is off by default, even if you use @samp{-Wall}.

@item
If @samp{-mpcrel} is on, as it always is, any @samp{-fpic} or @samp{-fPIC}
options are ineffective: @samp{-mpcrel} always implies @samp{-fpic}.

@item
Because we care about code size (and don't have an instruction cache), too
much of the following is probably counter-productive: @samp{-ffunction-cse},
@samp{-funroll-loops}, @samp{-funroll-all-loops}.  Hence these options are not
implied by the @samp{-O} flags, but must be selected explicitly.

@c The option @samp{-ffunction-cse} works, but (because we care about code size)
@c generally produces worse code.  Unlike other platforms, @samp{-O2} doesn't
@c turn function @sc{cse} on.

@item
If you use 64K code resources, the linker @samp{-r} option will not always work.
Fortunately, these are both unnecessary.

@item
Changing the specs file with @samp{-specs=@var{file}} or invoking
@code{m68k-palmos-as} or @code{m68k-palmos-ld} directly should be done
with caution: proper operation is quite dependent on options set in the
default specs file.
@end itemize


@node Include files
@section Include files

@subsection NewTypes.h

@findex @file{NewTypes.h}

With Palm OS SDKs prior to the 3.5 SDK, programmers were encouraged to use
typedefs such as @code{DWord} and @code{VoidHand} rather than the built-in
types.  In the 3.5 SDK, the names of these typedefs have been changed to
the somewhat more mnemonic @code{UInt32} (etc) and the rather more
functional @code{MemHandle}.  (Previously there were two ``handle''
datatypes, @code{VoidHand} and @code{Handle}, with no real reason for a
distinction between them, and programmers were continually casting between
them.  @code{MemHandle} corrects this historical accident.)

People wanting to write library header files capable of interacting with
any SDK have a dilemma:  which to use, old- or new-style type names?

You can use old-style names by instructing developers to include
@file{PalmCompatibility.h} before including your header file if they are
using the 3.5 SDK.  But this is not very satisfactory:  the onus shouldn't
be on developers to get this right, and you might prefer to use new-style
names.

You can ensure new-style names are available simply by including
@file{NewTypes.h} at the top of your header file, and instructing developers
to include at least @file{Common.h}/@file{PalmTypes.h} before your header.
(They are probably including @file{Pilot.h}/@file{PalmOS.h} anyway.)

Including @file{NewTypes.h} provides the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The identifiers @code{UInt8}, @code{Int8}, @code{UInt16}, @code{Int16},
@code{UInt32}, @code{Int32}, @code{MemPtr}, and @code{MemHandle} are
all typedeffed appropriately.

@item
The macro @code{SDK_VERSION} is defined to one of 10, 20, 30, 31, 35, 40,
and so on, indicating the SDK version which is in use.
@end itemize

@subsection Standalone.h

@findex @file{Standalone.h}

Including @file{Standalone.h} provides the macros listed below, which
facilitate building stand-alone code resources. @xref{Stand-alone code}.

@itemize @w{}
@item @code{STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_ID (@var{res_id})}
@item @code{STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_TYPE_ID (@var{res_type}, @var{res_id})}
@item @code{STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_TYPESTR_ID (@var{res_type}, @var{res_id})}
@item @code{HACKMASTER_TRAP (@var{vector})}
@end itemize


@node Global data
@chapter Global data

An application's variables can be divided into three classes according
to where they are stored.  Automatic variables local to functions are
stored on the stack, and have lifetimes corresponding to the duration
of the function invocation with which they are associated.  Some data
are explicitly allocated on the heap via @code{malloc()}, @code{MemPtrNew()},
or @code{MemHandleNew()}, and live until they are explicitly freed.  The
remainder---global and static variables---constitute an application's
@emph{global data}, and have lifetimes corresponding to the complete
runtime of the application.

Shared libraries can also have global data:  GLibs automatically have
globals just as applications do, while system libraries don't by default,
but could set up their own globals manually, if desired.

Currently, both C++ virtual tables and the support data for multiple
code resources are stored as global data.  This means that these features
can only be used when global data is available.

@menu
* Accessing::         How to access global data
* Initialising A4::   Initialising a non-standard global pointer
* Entry points::      Using extralogue attributes
@end menu


@node Accessing
@section Accessing global data

How global data should be accessed depends on what you are building:
@c (@pxref{Project types}):

@itemize @bullet
@item
Depending on its launch code, a Palm OS application may or may not have
access to its global data (see the @cite{Palm OS Reference} manual).
If global data is available, it is accessed via the @sc{a5} register
(which points to the @strong{end} of the global data).

@item
A GLib accesses its global data via the @sc{a4} register.

@item
A SysLib must set up global data in its @code{Open} vector if it wants any,
and then can access it via @sc{a4}.

@item
A Hack has no global data.
(But it could use similar tricks to a SysLib if it really wanted to.)
@end itemize

By default, or with @samp{-mno-own-gp}, compiled code will access global data
via (a negative offset from) @sc{a5}.  Shared libraries and other special
purpose programs should be compiled with @samp{-mown-gp}, and will use
(a positive offset from) @sc{a4} (see @pxref{New options}).



@node Initialising A4
@section Initialising @sc{a4}

In the following discussion, we use the term ``executable'' to refer to
either an application or a shared library of either type.

There are two ways a function can be called: either directly, or when its
address is taken and a call is subsequently made through that pointer.
An executable can construct a pointer to a function within itself, or to a
function in a GLib it uses (this will really be a pointer to the relevant
stub), but not to a SysLib or operating system API function (since you can't
construct a pointer to a systrap).

In simple cases, access to globals isn't a major problem:

@itemize @bullet
@item
When an executable @var{E} calls another function within @var{E}, it's just a
direct subroutine call, and of course @var{E}'s globals are still available.

@item
When an executable @var{E} calls a function in a GLib @var{L}, it calls via a
stub linked into @var{E} whose job is to set up access to @var{L}'s globals,
call the function proper, and then restore @var{E}'s globals afterwards.
Again, the appropriate globals are available.

@item
When an executable calls a function in a SysLib, it calls via a system trap,
which merely finds the library routine and calls it.  Thus, in this case, it
is the library routine's responsibility to arrange access to its globals.
@c (Note XXX: SysLib global entrypoints.)

@item
When an executable constructs a pointer to a function, and then @emph{itself}
calls through that pointer, it's again just a direct subroutine call, so its
globals are available.
@end itemize

@noindent
However, the situation gets more complex when an executable constructs a
pointer to a function and then gives it to someone else, perhaps by passing
it as an argument or by returning it to its caller.  ``Someone else'' may
be either another executable or the operating system (so the pointer is a
``callback function'').

The rules here are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Any pointer constructed by an application will work anywhere.

@item
A pointer constructed by a shared library to a function within that library
will work if that function takes steps to initialise its global pointer
(Note entrypoints.).  Feature and trampoline entrypoints are most suitable.

@item
A pointer constructed by a shared library to a function in a separate GLib
will never work at all,
@ignore
@footnote{In fact, it would be possible to use Ken
Krugler's non-intrusive trampoline technique (@cite{xx}).  However this would
require dummy parameters to be added to the other GLib's function, so doesn't
seen practical.}
@end ignore
because it is impossible to specify a special entrypoint
sequence for a GLib stub.  Fortunately, this can be worked around by adding
a function to the other GLib which returns the required function pointer.
@end itemize

@findex CALLBACK_PROLOGUE
@findex CALLBACK_EPILOGUE
In previous versions of prc-tools, applications also accessed their globals via
the @sc{a4} register, and their function pointers were therefore subject to the
same restrictions as shared library function pointers.  The appropriate steps
to initialise the global pointer are much simpler for an application than a
shared library, and were available via the macros @code{CALLBACK_PROLOGUE}
and @code{CALLBACK_EPILOGUE}.  This is no longer necessary.  However,
if you really want to use @samp{-mown-gp} when building an application,
you can use @code{APP_ENTRYPOINT} as a more convenient equivalent of the
@code{CALLBACK_*} macros.


@node Entry points
@section The @code{extralogue} attribute and entry points

An @code{extralogue}
@ignore
@footnote{Why `extralogue'?  It's a shameless mangling:  

Unfortunately, all those words---`pro', `epi', `logos'---came
to Latin from Greek, while the Romans invented `extra' themselves.  So
we've mixed up Latin and Greek roots, but that's not uncommon in this
television age@dots{}}
@end ignore
attribute allows you to add arbitrary code to a
function's prologue and epilogue.  Typically, it is used in conjunction with
an @code{owngp} attribute to initialise a separate globals pointer for the
duration of the function.  The @code{ENTRYPOINT} macro is defined in
@file{EntryPoints.h} for precisely this purpose:

@example
#define ENTRYPOINT(EXTRAS)  \
  __attribute__ ((__owngp__, __extralogue__ EXTRAS))
@end example

It takes between zero and eight parameters, each of which is a string with
the same syntax as an @code{asm} template string (@pxref{Extended Asm,
asm, Assembler Instructions with C Expression Operands, gcc, Using and
Porting GCC}):

@example
extralogue (@var{prologue}, @var{epilogue}, @var{single-epilogue}, @var{void-epilogue},
            @var{far-prologue}, @var{far-epilogue}, @var{far-single-epilogue}, @var{far-void-epilogue})
@end example

@noindent
This looks daunting, but often most of the parameters are unneeded.
A replacement will be chosen, as described below, for each argument you
leave empty (i.e., @t{""}).  If all arguments beyond a certain point would
be empty, you can omit them entirely.  Generally you only need to specify
one or two parameters because:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @samp{far-} variants are only used if functions in non-default
sections need special treatment.  Such `special treatment' is likely to
involve the global variables used to implement multiple sections.  Hence an
@code{extralogue} used to arrange access to global variables had better not
require such special treatment!

@item
The main @code{epilogue} is capable of handling all epilogues.  The
@samp{single-} and @samp{void-} variants allow you to supply more efficient
code in most cases, but are not truly necessary.

@item
In fact, you often won't need any special epilogue at all.
@end itemize

Thus, in practice, @code{extralogue} is often only used with one argument.
For example, an @code{ENTRYPOINT} equivalent to the @code{CALLBACK_*} macros
looks like this:

@example
ENTRYPOINT (("move.l %%a5,%%a4; sub.l #edata,%%a4"))
@end example

@noindent
Note that @code{ENTRYPOINT}, being a macro, requires two sets of parentheses
to emulate varargs.

See @file{EntryPoints.h} for more examples of the use of this attribute.

@subsubheading Prologues

The function prologue first emits code to save the current @sc{a4} value on
the stack.  It then emits the first one of the following which is non-empty
and whose condition, if any, is satisfied:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@item @var{far-prologue}
@tab if @var{function} has a @code{section} attribute
@item @var{prologue}
@tab
@end multitable

The string selected can use @code{%0} to refer to the address of the
function's first parameter.  @code{%0} will be a Mode 5 EA of the form
@code{@var{offset}(fp)} or @code{@var{offset}(sp)}.

Your prologue @strong{must not} leave any extra data on the stack!  If your
prologue and epilogue need to communicate with each other and their needs
aren't satisfied by @sc{a4}, your function should declare some local variables
for storage space, and your templates may access them at appropriate offsets
from @sc{fp}.

However, if you use @samp{-fomit-frame-pointer}, this won't work.  In this
case, you would need to fake your extra epilogue with @code{asm}, thus letting
the compiler figure out the correct offsets from @sc{sp}.  As with the old
@code{CALLBACK_EPILOGUE}, you would need to ensure that execution couldn't
escape from your function without going through your `epilogue'.

@subsubheading Epilogues

The function epilogue emits the first one of the following which is non-empty
and whose condition, if any, is satisfied:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@item @var{far-void-epilogue}
@tab if @var{function} has a @code{section} attribute and needs no return
register
@item @var{far-single-epilogue}
@tab if @var{function} has a @code{section} attribute and needs at most a single
return register
@item @var{far-epilogue}
@tab if @var{function} has a @code{section} attribute
@item @var{void-epilogue}
@tab if @var{function} needs no return register
@item @var{single-epilogue}
@tab if @var{function} needs at most a single return register
@item @var{epilogue}
@tab
@end multitable

The string selected can use @code{%0} to refer to the function's return
value, if any.  If the function requires several registers to return its
value (e.g., long longs are returned in @sc{d0} and @sc{d1}), then @code{%0}
will be a register list suitable for a @code{movem} instruction.  If the
function returns its value in a single register, then @code{%0} denotes
that register, and is either @code{%%d0} or @code{%%a0} depending on whether
the return type is a pointer.  Otherwise the function is either void or it
returns a large struct; in this case, @code{%0} will always be @code{%%a0}.

The epilogue then emits code to restore the old value of @sc{a4} from
the stack.

@subsubheading The @samp{far-} variants

You need to supply a @samp{far-} variant when the normal template won't work
properly when included in a function in a non-default section.  (This is not
a question of optimization, as is the case for the @code{epilogue} variants,
because the @samp{far-} variants generally won't work for a single code
resource executable.  Usually such variants are needed because they need to
use the @code{__text__} symbols, which would lead to link errors in a single
code resource executable.)

Two extra operands are available to @samp{far-} templates: @code{%a1} is the
function's section's @w{@samp{__text__@var{section}}} symbol, and @code{%2}
is the address of the main text section's base pointer global, i.e., it is
@w{@code{__text__(%%pic)}}, where @code{%%pic} is either @sc{a4} or @sc{a5}.
(This shows dramatically why @samp{far-} variants are unlikely to be used
with @code{ENTRYPOINT}: it's not much use accessing the text section's
base pointer via @sc{a4} when that register hasn't been set up yet!)

There are other possible uses of @code{extralogue} for which the @samp{far-}
variants are necessary.  For example, you could arrange for a profiling
function to be called at the start of a function like this:

@example
#define CALL_PROFILER \
  __attribute__ ((extralogue ("bsr.w __count", "", "", "",
                              "move.l %2,%%a0; jsr __count(%%a0)")))
int f() CALL_PROFILER;
@end example

@noindent
If you couldn't tell the compiler to use a cross-section jump when needed,
you would need to supply a separate version of the @code{CALL_PROFILER}
macro for use with functions with @code{section} attributes.  This would
lead to mysterious errors: the program would crash if the programmer used
the wrong version.

Alternatively, you could just call the profiling function like this:

@example
int f() @{
  __count();
  @r{@dots{}}
  @}
@end example

@noindent
So this isn't a good example, but hopefully it serves to demonstrate the
issues.  Perhaps someone will find a good use for all this flexibility!


@node Special projects
@chapter Special projects

When you compile and link using the default options, the size of your
application's code is limited to 32K.  The 68000 DragonBall processor can
only make a relative jump if it is of a distance of 32K or less, and you
will get errors from the assembler and/or linker if your code attempts to
jump further than that.  The default size limit, enforced at link time, is
such that it is possible to jump arbitrarily within a maximally sized code
resource without risking attempting an impossibly long jump.

While the default is limited, it is certainly possible to create larger
applications; the choices and issues involved are discussed in this chapter.

Also discussed are other types of projects: shared libraries and various
flavours of stand-alone code resources, particularly HackMaster Hacks and
Palm OS 5 armlets.

@menu
* Single code resource::       Size limitations for a single code resource.
* Multiple code resources::      ...and how to escape them.
* Shared libraries::           Creating and using shared libraries.
* Stand-alone code::           Hacks, armlets, etc.
@end menu


@node Single code resource
@section Size limitations for a single code resource

Even though the processor is unable to make a relative jump directly between
the extremities of a code section larger than 32K, it is still possible to
use such a code section if you are willing to indulge in manual heroics to
help the compiler avoid needing to make such an extreme function call.

Note that a code section corresponds to a @code{code} resource in your
project's final Palm OS database, and the maximum size for any kind of
resource is still limited to approximately 64K by the Palm OS memory manager
and the HotSync protocol.

Some of the heroic techniques are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Rearrange functions within source codes and object files on the link command
line so that function calls are only between ``nearby'' functions.

@item
When rearrangements are insufficient, insert ``jump islands'':  proxy
functions @code{foo_aux()} that just call the real function @code{foo()}
with the same arguments and which can be placed anywhere, thus effectively
giving each such @code{foo()} two entry points and loosening the constraints
on the arrangement problem.  Or use the assembly language equivalent of a
proxy function, which can avoid remarshalling the arguments and really be
a jump.

@item
Others are up to your imagination.
@end itemize

The maximum size of the main code section is specified in the linker
script and enforced during linking (@pxref{Linker Scripts, Scripts,
Linker Scripts, ld, Using ld}).  You can override the default script's
32K size by using the @code{-T @var{script}} linker option.
Two suitable linker scripts, which can be used as is or copied and modified,
are already provided, both allowing a @code{.text} section of up to
approximately 64K:

@table @code
@item -T text_64k
Up to 64720 bytes, the maximum resource size supported by all versions of
Palm OS to date.

@item -T text_64k_palmos3
Up to 65505 bytes, the maximum supported by Palm OS version 3.0 and higher.
@end table

There is, of course, some risk in going right up to the maximum resource
size limits.  In practice, the limit has typically been increasing with
each new version of Palm OS, and has never decreased.  Nonetheless, it may
be wise to use @code{text_64k} even if you plan to target only Palm OS 3.0
and higher devices.


@node Multiple code resources
@section Multiple code resources

Theoretically, the heroics required to make functions calls over a distance
of more than 32K are applicable for an arbitrarily large code resource.
Unfortunately each resource is still limited to only 64K by the HotSync
protocol, at least on Palm OS versions up to and including Palm OS 4.1.
Thus the gain compared to a hassle-free 32K code resource is not great,
and the best way to allow an application to increase beyond 32K of code is
to allow it to have @emph{multiple} separate code resources.

One simple technique for producing multiple code resources is to map
distinct GCC code sections into distinct Palm OS code resources.  This
version of prc-tools implements a limited form of that: functions may
be marked as being in particular sections via the standard GCC
@code{section} attribute (@pxref{Function Attributes, attributes,
Declaring Attributes of Functions, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}).
(These markings are used quite early in the compiler, so other ways of putting
functions into different sections, such as @code{-ffunction-sections}
and rearrangements at link time, don't work.)

A project definition file (@pxref{Definition files}) must be used, with
a multiple code clause to inform @code{build-prc} of the new sections.
You also need to define the pointer variables mentioned above in an
assembly language stub file linked into your executable, and should use
a linker script to place the new sections at appropriate addresses.
The easiest way to do these things is to use @code{multigen} to generate
them from the same definition file clause (@pxref{multigen}).

@menu
* Multiple code resources and globals::  But especially @strong{without} globals
* Multiple code tutorial::               Breaking up an existing application
@end menu


@node Multiple code resources and globals
@subsection Multiple code resources and global data

The current implementation puts pointers to the code resources into the
application's global data, and uses those pointers in the code emitted
for each call in which the calling function and the called function are in
different sections.  This means that you must not attempt to call between
different sections when globals are not available.

In particular, all functions in your application called while processing a
launch code that doesn't give you globals must be in the main code section.
This always includes @code{PilotMain}, which is always called by the startup
code for all launch codes.

@subsubheading Read-only data

Read-only data, such as string literals and other constant data, are put
into code sections rather than the global data section.  This saves global
data space, which is in short supply, and is valid since the data, just
like the code resources that contain them, are read-only.

When an item of read-only data has file or global scope, it will be placed
in the main code section.  When it is local to a function, it will mostly,
but not always, be placed in the same code section as that function.

GCC's optimizer will usually notice when a string literal (or other constant)
is identical to one which has been previously emitted, and will reuse the
storage previously emitted rather than reserving more space for a duplicate.

Thus, in the following example, when optimisation is on, the string literal
referenced from @code{bar} may well be in the @code{foosec} section, while
@code{bar} itself is in the main code section:

@example
const char *foo () __attribute__ ((section ("foosec")));
const char *foo () @{ return "hello world"; @}
const char *bar () @{ return "hello world"; @}
@end example

The code emitted for such a reference is similar to that emitted for an
inter-section function call: when there is a data reference in which the
referring function and the referenced item of read-only data are in different
sections, the code emitted uses the item's code resource's pointer, which is
located in the application's global data.

This means that you must ensure that this sort of reference doesn't occur
when globals are not available.  Because this compiler optimisation (of
course) occurs only within a single translation unit, a sufficient (but not
necessary) way to ensure this is by placing functions which are in different
sections in different translation units (e.g., in separate @file{.c} files).

In particular, all read-only data referenced while processing a launch code
that doesn't give you globals must be in the main code section.  (Thus, in
the example above, @code{bar} is likely to crash if it is called during a
no-globals launch.)

This can be arranged in the following ways, amongst others:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Write functions used during no-globals launches so that they use read-only
data with file or global scope:

@example
const char greeting[] = "hello world";
const char *bar () @{ return greeting; @}
@end example

@item
Order the functions within a translation unit so that all functions in the
main code section are defined before any functions in other code sections.
Then any shared read-only data will be in the main code section.

(When an item of read-only data is reused, it will have been placed in the
same section as the function from which it was @strong{first} referenced.
Thus, if the functions are ordered as described, all read-only data
referenced from the functions in the main code section will themselves be
in the main code section.  Any inter-section references to read-only data
must then be from functions in other named code sections.  But in order for
such a function to have been called, globals must be available; hence the
inter-section reference will be safe too.)
@end itemize


@node Multiple code tutorial
@subsection Breaking up an existing application

To use multiple code resources in an existing application, you need to
do the following:

@enumerate
@item
If your Makefile uses @code{obj-res}, change it to use
@code{build-prc} directly on your bfd executable.  For example,
from an original

@example
myapp.prc: code0000.myapp.grc @dots{}
        build-prc @dots{} *.myapp.grc @dots{}

code0000.myapp.grc: myapp
        m68k-palmos-obj-res myapp
@end example

remove references to .grc files, and delete the obj-res rule altogether:

@example
myapp.prc: myapp @dots{}
        build-prc @dots{} myapp @dots{}
@end example

@item
Choose functions to be placed in other code sections, and annotate their
declarations:
@example
#define EDIT_SECTION  __attribute__ ((section ("editfns")))

void EditFormHandler (@dots{}) EDIT_SECTION;
void DrawEditForm () EDIT_SECTION;
@end example
(This also demonstrates using a macro to ease moving several functions at once.)

Make very sure that the relevant annotated declaration is visible when you
define such a function, and especially @strong{everywhere} you call it.
If there is a call to a non-default sectioned function from which the
annotated declaration is not visible, the call will be generated as a call
to the default code section.  When such a call is executed, it jumps to
effectively a random location in the wrong code section and almost
certainly crashes.  (Warning options which can detect these mistakes at
compile time are noted in the discussion of required visibilities in
@ref{Function attributes}.)

Note that COFF only stores eight character of a section name:  if your
section names are any longer than this, they will be truncated, leading
to trouble.

@item
Add a multiple code clause to your definition file:

@example
multiple code @{ "editfns" @}
@end example

Or, if you're not already using a definition file, write one including such
a clause and use it in your build-prc command:

@example
myapp.prc: myapp.def myapp @dots{}
        build-prc @dots{} myapp.def myapp @dots{}
@end example

@item
Add rules to your Makefile to generate and build the assembler stub and linker
script.

@example
myapp-sections.o: myapp-sections.s
        m68k-palmos-gcc -c myapp-sections.s

myapp-sections.s myapp-sections.ld: myapp.def
        m68k-palmos-multigen myapp.def
@end example

@item
Link the assembler stub into your bfd executable, and use the linker script
to place the extra code sections at appropriate addresses.
@example
OBJS = @emph{@dots{}list of object files@dots{}} myapp-sections.o

myapp: $(OBJS) myapp-sections.ld
        m68k-palmos-gcc -o myapp $(OBJS) myapp-sections.ld
@end example
@end enumerate


@node Shared libraries
@section Shared libraries

@c FIXME
(This section has not yet been written; see @ref{stubgen}, and also the
library projects in the sample code collection.)


@node Stand-alone code
@section Stand-alone code resources

@cindex Stand-alone code resource
@cindex HackMaster hacks
@cindex Section, @code{.disposn}
@cindex Section, @code{.trap}
@cindex ARMlet

Normally build-prc processes a bfd executable as a full-blown executable,
converting its @code{.data}, @code{.bss}, and @code{.text} and any other
code sections into the corresponding Palm OS resources, as appropriate.

However if the bfd executable contains certain sections that are special
to build-prc, its @code{.text} section will be converted into a stand-alone
code resource instead, and the other sections listed above will be
discarded (producing warnings) if present.

These ``special sections'' are @code{.disposn} (which is an abbreviation of
@emph{disposition}) and @code{.trap}.  They are interpreted as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The first two bytes of a @code{.disposn} section, if present, specify the
generated resource's @sc{id}, while (if the section is at least six bytes in
length) the next four bytes specify its type.  If the @code{.disposn} section
is only two bytes in length, the generated resource's type will be a suitable
default dependent on the architecture of the bfd executable: @code{code} for
68000 or @code{armc} for @sc{arm}.

@item
The first two bytes of a @code{.trap} section, if present, are converted
into a @code{TRAP} resource.  If a @code{.disposn} section is also present,
the @code{TRAP} resource will have the @sc{id} specified by that section;
otherwise (when the project definition file specifies the Hack project kind),
@code{TRAP} and @code{code} resources converted from successive bfd executables
are numbered consecutively from 1000.
@end itemize

@noindent
Note that these two-byte integer fields are interpreted according to the
native endianness of the bfd executable in which they occur.

@subheading Producing a stand-alone code resource

There is nothing special about compiling code that is to become stand-alone,
other than that you must not use global data or any extra code resources,
because stand-alone code, by definition, cannot have such things.

There are considerations at link time, related to the lack of startup code:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Stand-alone code needs to be called directly; in particular, the startup code
for a Palm OS application or GLib shared library is certainly not appropriate.
Hence you should link using GCC's @code{-nostartfiles} option (@pxref{Link
Options, options, Options for Linking, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}).

@item
If the bfd executable's @emph{entry point} is not at offset 0 within its
@code{.text} section, build-prc will insert an appropriate jump instruction
at the start of the generated code resource.  Thus a stand-alone code resource
can always be jumped to by jumping to its beginning.

You specify the entry point at link time:  in short, it is a function named
@code{start()} by default, or you can set it with the @code{-e} option
(@pxref{Entry Point, entry point, Setting the entry point, ld, Using ld}).
@end itemize

You can easily set up the special sections marking your code as stand-alone
by using the following macros, provided in @file{Standalone.h}:

@table @code
@item STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_ID (@var{id})
Mark the executable as a stand-alone code resource with the specified @var{id}
and a suitable resource type depending on the resulting compiled executable's
architecture: @samp{code} for 68000 or @samp{armc} for ARM.

@item STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_TYPE_ID (@var{type}, @var{id})
@itemx STANDALONE_CODE_RESOURCE_TYPESTR_ID (@var{type}, @var{id})
Mark the executable as a stand-alone code resource with the specified
resource @var{type} and @var{id}.
If you specify @var{type} with a multicharacter char constant (@samp{'TYPE'}),
use the @code{@dots{}TYPE@dots{}} macro; if you use a string (@samp{"TYPE"}),
use the @code{@dots{}TYPESTR@dots{}} version.

@item HACKMASTER_TRAP (@var{vector})
Mark the executable as a stand-alone code resource, and add a @code{TRAP}
resource containing @var{vector}, which may be any C constant expression,
for example, a numeric constant or even a @code{sysTrap@var{foo}} constant
as defined in a Palm OS SDK's @file{CoreTraps.h}.
@end table


@node Definition files
@chapter Definition files

A project may optionally contain a definition file, which is read by
@code{build-prc} and also by several other utilities.  This file is
used to specify various miscellaneous properties of the project, such
as database header flags, names of multiple sections, and exported library
functions.

@section General syntax

A definition file should have the extension @file{.def}, and is a freely
formatted file consisting of numbers, strings, comments, keywords,
and various punctuation.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Numbers may be in decimal (@samp{37}), octal (@samp{045}), or hexadecimal
(@samp{0x25}).

@item
Strings are enclosed in either single (@samp{'Hello'}) or double
(@samp{"world"}) quotes, and may contain the usual C escape sequences
(@samp{\t}, @samp{\n}, @samp{\'}, @samp{\"}, @samp{\\}, @samp{\177},
@samp{\x7F}, @dots{}).  If a string contains only alphanumeric characters
and does not conflict with a keyword, the quotes may be omitted.

@item
Both C style (@samp{/* comment */}) and C++ style (@samp{// until end
of line}) comments may appear anywhere white space could occur, and
are ignored.
@end itemize

A definition file consists of several clauses, which generally have
syntax like the following:

@example
@var{clause-kind} @{ @var{specific-data}@dots{} @}
@end example

For example, here is a complete definition file for a (hypothetical) fairly
large non-beamable application:

@example
application @{ "Dr McCoy" DAFp copy-prevention @}

/* This app has three code resources: code #1 with all unannotated
   functions, #2 with functions placed in the "editfns" section,
   and #3 with "viewfns" functions.  */

multiple code @{ editfns viewfns @}
@end example

@section Specifying the kind of project

You can specify the database header attributes which appeared in an
old-style build-prc command line along with the kind of project being
built in this clause:

@example
@var{project-kind} [ @var{type} ] @{ @var{dbname} @var{crid} @var{miscellaneous}@dots{} @}
@end example

@noindent
This clause must appear exactly once, and must be first in the file,
before any other clauses.  @var{dbname}, @var{crid}, and @var{type}
specify the database's name, creator id, and type.  Except when
@var{project-kind} is @code{database}, type can be omitted and a type
suitable for the project kind will be used.  @var{project-kind} controls
the processing of the bfd executable, and should be one of the following:

@table @code
@item app
@itemx application
Build a Palm OS application, with a default type of @code{appl}.
Code and data sections in the bfd executable are converted into Palm OS
@code{code}, @code{data}, and @code{rloc} resources, and @code{code #0}
and @code{pref #0} resources are synthesised.

@item glib
Build a GLib shared library, with a default type of @code{GLib}.  Code and
data sections in the bfd executable are converted into GLib @code{code},
@code{data}, and @code{rloc} resources.

@item syslib
Build a system shared library, with a default type of @code{libr}.
Code sections in the bfd executable are converted into @code{libr}
code resources.  Since system libraries typically don't have their
own global data, data sections in the bfd executable will produce a
warning rather than being converted, unless you also use the @code{data}
miscellaneous flag.

@item hack
Build a HackMaster hack, with a default type of @code{HACK}.  All bfd
executables given should be marked as stand-alone code sections, and any
data sections or extra code sections present will elicit warnings from
build-prc (@pxref{Stand-alone code}).

@item database
This implies no special handling of the bfd executable, and so builds a
generic database.  In this case, @var{type} must not be omitted.
@end table

The database name and creator id must come first within the braces,
and may be followed by any number of the following, in any order:

@table @code
@item  read-only
@itemx appinfo-dirty
@itemx backup
@itemx ok-to-install-newer
@itemx reset-after-install
@itemx copy-prevention
@itemx stream
@itemx hidden
@itemx launchable-data
@itemx recyclable
@itemx bundle
Set the corresponding database header attribute, adding to any attributes
specified as options to build-prc.  These may also be spelt with the
hyphens replaced by underscores or omitted altogether (@samp{readonly},
@samp{appinfo_dirty}, etc).

@item modification=@var{num}
@itemx modnum=@var{num}
@itemx modno=@var{num}
Set the modification number in the database header to @var{num}.

@item version=@var{num}
Set the database header version number to @var{num}.

@item stack=@var{size}
For an application, make the @code{pref #0} resource request @var{size}
bytes of stack space.  By default, 4K is requested.

@item data
For a system shared library, convert any data sections in input bfd
executables into Palm OS data resources.  Without this flag, when
build-prc is building a system shared library, any data sections will
cause warnings instead of being converted.
@end table


@section Declaring multiple code sections

Each section name that you use in a function section attribute in your project
needs to be listed in your definition file in a multiple code clause:

@example
multiple code @{ @var{sectionname}@dots{} @}
@end example

@noindent
This is used by multigen to produce an assembly language list of the
section names which needs to be linked into your executable, and also
by build-prc to map named code sections to numbered code resources in
the .prc file.

Build-prc will emit warnings if there are sections in your executable
which are omitted from this clause, or vice versa.


@section Listing exported library entry point functions

Both system shared libraries and GLibs require a dispatch table and a small
amount of other assembler support code.  You can write this by hand, or you
can use stubgen to generate the needed code from an export clause:

@example
export @{ @var{function-name}@dots{} @}
@end example

Dispatch table entries are generated in the order in which function names are
listed in the export clause.  Thus, for the sake of binary compatibility
between releases of your library, it is important to avoid changing the
ordinal positions of function names.  For example, new functions being added
to an existing library should be added at the end of the export clause, after
the existing functions names.


@node Debugging
@chapter Using a debugger

@c FIXME write something here

@menu
* Enabling debugging::
* Palm OS-specific GDB features::
@end menu


@node Enabling debugging
@section Building an application with debugging enabled

As on any other platform, you instruct GCC to produce debugging information
by compiling with the @samp{-g} option.

Some debuggers targeting Palm OS, notably GDB, also need your application
to have a special stub (called @code{StartDebug}) in its startup code so
that they can attach to the running application successfully.

To include this stub, you also need to @emph{link} with @samp{-g}.

By default, the stub is disabled and your application runs normally.
When the stub sees that a @code{gdbS} #0 feature exists and has the value
0x12BEEF34, it is enabled and will converse with the debugger, telling it
where in memory to find the application.

There are two convenient ways to set this feature and enable the stub:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The Palm OS Emulator (version 2.1d22 or greater) sets the feature
automatically whenever there is a debugger connected to its debugger port.
Thus there is no need to do anything yourself to enable debugging on Poser.

@item
Gdb Panel, in the
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=4429&release_id=24287, prc-tools samples},
is a small Palm OS application which sets this feature.  You need to use it
or something similar when debugging on a real device.
@end itemize


@node Palm OS-specific GDB features
@section Palm OS-specific GDB features

@findex target

To debug Palm OS applications, GDB needs to load symbolic information from
the bfd executable corresponding to your application, and to be connected
to the Palm OS device where the application is running.  You generally
specify the bfd executable on the command line (for example, to debug an
application @file{myapp.prc})

@example
$ m68k-palmos-gdb myapp
@end example

@noindent
and connect using the @samp{target} command.

@table @code
@item target palmos @var{port}
@itemx target pilot @var{port}
Connects the GDB host environment to a Palm OS device via @var{port}, using
the Palm debugger protocol.  The argument @var{port} may be a device such
as @file{/dev/ttyS0} (Unix) or @file{COM1} (Windows) to connect to a real
device over a serial line, or a socket such as @samp{localhost:2000} to
connect to the Palm OS Emulator.

Using @code{pilot} is equivalent to @code{palmos}, and is provided for
compatibility with earlier releases.  If @var{port} is omitted, GDB will
attempt to connect to @samp{localhost:2000} by default.

@c @@@ remove this note when 2.1 is available
(The prc-tools 2.0 release only supported the @code{pilot} keyword, and
@var{port} was not optional.)
@end table

After you have connected to the device, you should enable the debugger
stub (@pxref{Enabling debugging}), which is done automatically if you
are connecting to Poser, and start your application, which you've compiled
and linked with @samp{-g}.

When your application starts up, GDB receives data from the
debugger stub telling it how to correlate the bfd executable's debugging
information with where in memory the application has been loaded.  Because
of this, you need to ensure that the debugging information has been loaded
@emph{before} the breakpoint is received---hence typically the bfd file of
debugging information is specified on the GDB command line.

The debugger stub also causes execution to stop as if at a breakpoint at
the start of @code{PilotMain}, giving you a chance to interact with the
debugger before your program runs but after you're connected to it.
However, @code{PilotMain} can be entered multiple times---for example,
if your application is sublaunched with another launch code or if you
(or a gremlin) switch to another application and back again---and you
may not want to break into the debugger every time.  You can control
whether the debugger stops at this implicit breakpoint by changing the
way GDB handles the @code{SIGSTOP} signal (@pxref{Signals, , Signals,
gdb, Debugging with GDB}).

There are some other features and limitations:

@itemize @bullet
@item
As a last resort before printing @samp{??} for a function name, GDB will
try to get the (mangled) name by querying the target for a MacsBug symbol.
For example, this makes backtraces containing the stack frames of functions
in the Palm OS ROM more informative.

@item
At present, GDB won't work well with applications with multiple code resources.
@end itemize


@node Post-linker and other tools
@chapter Post-linker and other tools

On most platforms, you compile and link your programs, and the resulting
executable is the program you run.  (The GNU linker produces an executable
using a library named ``bfd''---hence the term ``bfd executable'').
On Palm OS, however, this bfd executable is not, in fact, executable:
its format must be changed from bfd COFF to a .prc database file, and,
for all but the most trivial programs, UI resources must be bound in.

The post-linker tools are @code{build-prc}, which reads a definition
file and various resource sources to generate a Palm OS .prc file,
and @code{obj-res}, which converts a bfd executable into resources.
(Build-prc can now read bfd executables directly, so there is no
need to use obj-res anymore, but it is still supported for backwards
compatibility.)  There are also @code{multigen} and @code{stubgen},
which generate various support files;
and @code{trapfilt}, which decodes Palm OS trap vectors.

Other miscellaneous tools include @code{palmdev-prep}, which informs GCC of
the locations of Palm OS SDKs and the like.  You should run it whenever you
upgrade prc-tools or install new SDKs or modify existing ones.

@menu
* build-prc::
* multigen::
* stubgen::
* obj-res::
* palmdev-prep::
* trapfilt::
@end menu


@node build-prc
@section build-prc

@findex build-prc

@example
build-prc [ -l ] [ -L ] [ -t @var{type} ] @var{prcfile} @var{app-name} @var{crid} @var{file}@dots{}

build-prc [ -o @var{file} | --output @var{file} ]
          [ -a @var{file} | --appinfo @var{file} ]
          [ -s @var{file} | --sortinfo @var{file} ]
          [ -l ] [ -L ] [ -H | --hack ]
          [ -t @var{type} | --type @var{type} ]
          [ -c @var{crid} | --creator @var{crid} ]
          [ -n @var{name} | --name @var{name} ]
          [ -m @var{num} | --modification-number @var{num} ]
          [ -v @var{num} | --version-number @var{num} ]
          [ --read-only ] [ --appinfo-dirty ] [ --backup ]
          [ --ok-to-install-newer ] [ --reset-after-install ]
          [ --copy-prevention ] [ --stream ] [ --hidden ]
          [ --launchable-data ] [ --recyclable ] [ --bundle ]
          [ -z @var{n} | --compress-data @var{n} ]
          [ --no-check-header ] [ --no-check-resources ]
          [ --no-check ]
          @var{file}@dots{}
@end example

@code{build-prc} reads resources from the input files given and
combines them into one output Palm OS .prc resource data file.  There are
two styles of build-prc command line:  in the old style, the first three
non-option arguments describe the output file, and input files don't start
until the fourth argument.  In the new style, all non-option arguments
are input files.  An invocation is new-style if the first file argument
does not have a .prc extension or if the @code{-o} option is used.

Input files are identified by their extension:

@table @code
@item @var{fname}.def
A project definition file, which controls the post-linking process.
If your project uses a definition file, there can be only one and it
must be first in the list of input files.  (Hence definition files can
only be used in a new-style invocation.)

@item @var{type}@var{nnnn}.bin
@itemx @var{type}@var{nnnn}.@var{progname}.grc
A raw binary resource file (the .grc style filename is produced
by obj-res).  The contents of a raw file are added to the output as
a @code{@var{type} #@var{nnnn}} resource, where @var{nnnn} is in hexadecimal.

@item  @var{fname}.prc
@itemx @var{fname}.ro
A resource database in @code{.prc} format.  The contents of all the
resources in a resource database are copied to the output database.
(The information in the input database's header---name, creator, flags,
etc---is entirely ignored.)

@item @var{progname}
Files with no extensions are treated as bfd executables.  If a bfd
executable contains either a @code{.disposn} or a @code{.trap} section,
its @code{.text} section is converted to a stand-alone code resource
accordingly (@pxref{Stand-alone code}).  Otherwise, its code and data
sections are converted to resources according to a definition
file, or, if there is no definition file, as if the @code{application}
project kind was specified.
@end table

By default, @code{build-prc} uses its first non-option argument as
the filename for its output .prc file.  In an old-style command line,
@var{prcfile} is used as is.  In a new-style command line, the output
filename is formed by removing the extension, if any, from the first
file argument and appending `.prc'.

@table @code
@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output @var{file}
Write the .prc output to @var{file}.  It is an error to use this
option in an old-style command line, as it conflicts with the mandatory
@var{prcfile} argument.

@item -a @var{file}
@itemx --appinfo @var{file}
Add an AppInfo block with the contents of @var{file} to the database.

@item -s @var{file}
@itemx --sortinfo @var{file}
Add a SortInfo block with the contents of @var{file} to the database.

@item -l
Build a GLib shared library; this is equivalent to specifying a project
kind of ``glib'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the
default database type and the disposition of code and data sections in
the bfd executable, and influences resource checking.

@item -L
Build a system shared library; this is equivalent to specifying a project
kind of ``syslib'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the
default database type and the disposition of code (and data) sections in
the bfd executable, and influences resource checking.

@item -H
@itemx --hack
Build a HackMaster hack; this is equivalent to specifying a project kind
of ``hack'' in a definition file.  In particular, it changes the default
database type, requires all bfd executables to be marked as stand-alone,
and influences resource checking.

@item -t @var{type}
@itemx --type @var{type}
Set the database's type to @var{type}, overriding any type it may get from
a definition file or elsewhere.

Note that this affects @emph{only} the type recorded in the database
header; in particular, it does not change build-prc's notion of the kind
of project being generated (@pxref{Definition files, project kinds}), nor
does it influence resource checking.  If you do not want the database to
be checked as if it is an application, you must either tell build-prc what
it @emph{really} is, by using a definition file or one of the options
listed above, or, as a last resort, suppress resource checking entirely.

@item -c @var{crid}
@itemx --creator @var{crid}
Set the database's creator ID to @var{crid}, overriding any ID it may get
from a definition file.  It is an error to use this option in an old-style
command line, as it conflicts with the mandatory @var{crid} argument.

@item -n @var{name}
@itemx --name @var{name}
Set the database's name to @var{name}, overriding any name it may get from
a definition file.  It is an error to use this option in an old-style command
line, as it conflicts with the mandatory @var{app-name} argument.

@item -m @var{num}
@itemx --modification-number @var{num}
Set the modification number in the database header to @var{num}.

@item -v @var{num}
@itemx --version-number @var{num}
Set the database header version number to @var{num}.

@item  --read-only
@itemx --appinfo-dirty
@itemx --backup
@itemx --ok-to-install-newer
@itemx --reset-after-install
@itemx --copy-prevention
@itemx --stream
@itemx --hidden
@itemx --launchable-data
@itemx --recyclable
@itemx --bundle
Set the corresponding database header attribute, adding to any attributes
set in a definition file.  These options may also be spelt without the
internal hyphens (@code{--readonly}, etc).

@item -z @var{N}
@itemx --compress-data @var{N}
Compress the data resource, `data #0'.  Compression ranges from 0, no
compression, to 7, full (and somewhat experimental!) compression.

@item --no-check-header
Suppress warnings related to invalid database header fields, such as a blank
database name or creator ID.  If the database being generated is only for
use as a temporary file, for example, these warnings may not be of interest.

@item --no-check-resources
Suppress checking for the presence of vital resources.  Databases
corresponding to particular kinds of project are malformed if they do not
contain certain resources:  for example, an application without a `code #1'
resource cannot be launched correctly, and a Hack requires `TRAP' resources
to be numbered consecutively and to have corresponding `code' resources.

By default, build-prc will check for these resources and emit diagnostics
accordingly, which helps you detect mistakes such as the omission of a bfd
executable from the build-prc invocation.

@item --no-check
Suppress all checking of the generated database; this is equivalent to using
all of the @code{--no-check-@var{foo}} options listed above.
@end table


@node multigen
@section multigen

@findex multigen

@example
multigen [ -b @var{base} | --base @var{base} ] @var{deffile}.def
@end example

The @code{multigen} utility generates an assembly language source file
and a linker script for use in projects with multiple code resources
(@pxref{Multiple code resources}).  The assembly stub file must be
compiled in with your application, and the linker script should be
added to your link command.

You can write the required assembly language definitions and linker
script yourself if you wish, but it is easier to have @code{multigen}
generate them for you from the relevant clause in your project's definition
file (@pxref{Definition files}).

@code{multigen} reads from @file{@var{deffile}.def} and by
default writes the assembler stub file to @file{@var{deffile}-sections.s} and
the linker script to @file{@var{deffile}-sections.ld}.

@table @code
@item -b @var{base}
@itemx --base @var{base}
Write the assembly language output to @file{@var{base}.s} and the linker
script to @file{@var{base}.ld}.
@end table


@node stubgen
@section stubgen

@findex stubgen

@example
stubgen [ -b @var{base} | --base @var{base} ] @var{deffile}.def
@end example

The @code{stubgen} utility generates assembly language stub files for a
GLib or an assembly language dispatch table for a SysLib (@pxref{Shared
libraries}).  You can write these stub files yourself, but, particularly
for a GLib, it is easier to have @code{stubgen} generate them for you from the
relevant clause in your library's definition file (@pxref{Definition files}).

@code{stubgen} reads from @var{deffile} and by default writes its output to
@file{@var{deffile}-stubs.c} and @file{@var{deffile}-jumps.s}, or to
@file{@var{deffile}-dispatch.s}, depending on the @var{project-kind}
specified in @var{deffile}.

@table @code
@item -b @var{base}
@itemx --base @var{base}
Write the GLib output to @file{@var{base}-stubs.c} and
@file{@var{base}-jumps.s}, or the SysLib output to
@file{@var{base}-dispatch.s}.

(This is inconsistent with the way @code{multigen} handles the @samp{-b}
option.  One or the other is likely to change.)
@end table


@node obj-res
@section obj-res

@findex obj-res

This section is a copy of the original @code{obj-res} man page.

@subheading @sc{Name}

obj-res --- convert an object/executable file in a format supported by GNU
BFD to PalmOS compatible resource files

@subheading @sc{Synopsis}

@example
obj-res [-lL] @var{object.file}
@end example

@subheading @sc{Description}

This manual page documents the utility @code{obj-res}.  @code{obj-res}
reads a file in a BFD supported object file format (most usually COFF) and
generates the files necessary to make up a PalmOS executable in the current
directory.  These files can be bound together into a PalmOS executable using
the @code{build-prc} utility.

@subheading @sc{Options}

@table @code
@item -l
generate resources for a GNU style `GLib' shared library

@item -L
generate resources for a PalmOS version 2 shared library
@end table

@subheading @sc{Usage}

Pass the file name of the BFD compatible executable file on the command line.
@code{obj-res} will generate the necessary resource files in the current
directory ending in the extension @file{.grc}.

@subheading @sc{Bugs}

code #0 resources are generated with magic values for some fields that are
unused by the current versions of PalmOS.

Compression of the data #0 resource is simple minded.

@subheading @sc{Author}

@code{obj-res} was written by D.Jeff Dionne, relocation by Kresten Krab Thorup.


@node palmdev-prep
@section palmdev-prep

@findex palmdev-prep

@example
palmdev-prep [ -d @var{sdk} | --default @var{sdk} ]
             [ -r | --remove ]
             [ -q | --quiet | --silent ] [ -v | --verbose ]
             [ --dump-specs @var{target} ]
             [ @var{directory}@dots{} ]
@end example

Most Palm OS programs use functions from the Palm OS API, so need to
@code{#include} various Palm OS header files and perhaps also to link
with static libraries such as Palm OS Glue.
The preprocessor and the linker need to be told, one directory at a time,
where to search for these files, via options such as @code{-I},
@code{-isystem}, and @code{-L} (@pxref{Directory Options, options,
Options for Directory Search, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}).

Early versions of prc-tools contained a hard-coded list of directories to
be searched.  Unfortunately, more recently there has been a tendency for
each new Palm OS SDK to introduce new directories unpredictably and
sometimes even to rearrange the old ones.  Hence the hard-coded list
approach is no longer practical; instead, you can use @code{palmdev-prep}
to generate a list of directories tailored to the SDKs and other Palm OS
development material you actually have installed.

The @code{palmdev-prep} utility scans the standard PalmDev directory and
any extra directories listed on its command line, and generates the options
required to make GCC search as appropriate each of the subdirectories found
under each of the root directories given.
The ``standard PalmDev location'' is determined when prc-tools is configured;
typically on Unix it is @file{/opt/palmdev} and on Cygwin it is typically
@file{/PalmDev}, which typically corresponds to the Windows directory
@file{C:\PalmDev}.

In detail:  first @code{palmdev-prep} looks in each root directory given
for (immediate) subdirectories whose names start with @file{sdk-}, which it
calls ``SDK directories''.

It then examines each SDK directory in turn.  If an SDK directory contains a
directory named @file{include} or @file{Incs}, GCC's preprocessor will be
instructed to search for header files within @emph{all} subdirectories nested
thereunder.
Similarly, if an SDK directory contains a directory named @file{lib} or
@file{GCC Libraries}, the linker will be instructed to search for libraries in
the directories thereunder corresponding to the particular target architecture
and multilib options in use.

If an SDK directory contains a file named @file{base}, then that file should
contain a single line (e.g.@: @samp{sdk-3.5} or simply @samp{4}) specifying
another SDK upon which this SDK is based.  The preprocessor and linker will
then be instructed to search also the directories given by the base SDK, and
to do so @emph{after} searching those from @emph{this} SDK.  This can be used
to have replacement files from an ``SDK Update'' override files from the SDK
that is being updated, while also allowing the use of the pristine original
SDK.

It also detects @file{include}, @file{Incs}, @file{lib}, and
@file{GCC Libraries} directories immediately within each root directory
specified, causing them to be searched @emph{after} all those corresponding
to the particular SDK in use.

@table @code
@item -d @var{sdk}
@itemx --default @var{sdk}
When GCC is invoked without any @code{-palmos@var{N}} options, the SDK chosen
to be the default SDK during the last invocation of palmdev-prep will be used
(@pxref{New options}).
This option specifies that @var{sdk} should be the default; if you don't
choose a default this way yourself, palmdev-prep will choose the highest SDK
detected as the default.

@item -r
@itemx --remove
Remove all files installed by palmdev-prep.

@item -q
@itemx --quiet
@itemx --silent
Suppress the normal listing showing the SDKs found and their validity.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Display details of files modified and actions taken by palmdev-prep.

@item --dump-specs @var{target}
Write a specs file describing the PalmDev headers and libraries for
@var{target} to standard output, instead performing of the normal installation
actions.  This is for use while prc-tools itself is being built.
@end table

The directory structure and default SDK captured by palmdev-prep will be
used by GCC until the next invocation of palmdev-prep.  You should rerun
@code{palmdev-prep} whenever you

@itemize @bullet
@item
upgrade prc-tools;

@item
install or remove a Palm OS SDK or other development material
(specifically, when the collection of subdirectories changes);

@item
want to change which SDK is to be used by default.
@end itemize

For the curious: @code{palmdev-prep} creates a GCC specs file that converts
@code{-palmos@var{N}} options into the corresponding set of @code{-isystem}
and @code{-L} options (@pxref{Spec Files, specs, Specifying subprocesses
and the switches to pass to them, gcc, Using and Porting GCC}).  This is how
it is able to affect later unrelated invocations of GCC.  This file is
inside one of GCC's internal directories, so on a typical Unix installation
you need to be a privileged user to write to it.


@c FIXME: need a section about the structure of a PalmDev tree


@node trapfilt
@section trapfilt

@findex trapfilt

@example
trapfilt [ -q | --quiet | --silent ] [ @var{vector}@dots{} ]
@end example

On the 68000, calls to Palm OS system API functions are compiled into a
@code{trap} instruction followed by a @emph{trap vector}, which is a 16-bit
number in a range starting at 0xA000.  The mapping between particular system
functions and numeric trap vectors is given in the @file{CoreTraps.h} header
in a Palm OS SDK (or @file{SysTraps.h} in older SDKs).

A disassembly listing of a Palm OS program displays only the @code{trap}
instructions and the raw trap vectors.  The @code{trapfilt} utility decodes
trap vectors using the mapping given by the header from the default SDK
selected with @code{palmdev-prep}.  Typically you use it in conjunction
with a disassembly listing from @code{objdump}:

@example
m68k-palmos-objdump -d myapp | m68k-palmos-trapfilt
@end example

If any @var{vector} arguments are given, @code{trapfilt} decodes them and
outputs the results on standard output.  Otherwise, when no such arguments
are given, it acts as a filter: copying from standard input to standard
output, annotating each line that matches the syntax of a trap vector
(i.e., the syntax as printed by @code{objdump}) with the name of the
corresponding system function, if any.

@table @code
@item -q
@itemx --quiet
@itemx --silent
In non-filter mode, output only the system function name for each @var{vector}
given.  The default output format in non-filter mode is similar to that used
in filter mode.
@end table


@ignore
@node Debugging
@chapter Using the debugger

For example, suppse you wish to use the debugger on `Simple App',
@file{simpleapp.prc}, which is built from @file{simpleexec} and has source
code @file{mymain.c} and @file{myform.c}.
We don't suggest that you set up a project like this!  These files are oddly
named to demonstrate the lack of required relationships between the names.

@example
$ m68k-palmos-gcc -g -c mymain.c
$ m68k-palmos-gcc -g -c myform.c
$ m68k-palmos-gcc -g -o simpleexec mymain.o myform.o
$ build-prc simpleapp.prc "Simple App" SMPL simpleexec @i{resources@dots{}}
[Install simpleapp.prc on emulator]
$ m68k-palmos-gdb simpleexec
[loading symbols...]
gdb> target pilot localhost:2000
[...]
@end example

@c We'll change it to `target palmos' when they change the name of PilotMain()!
@end ignore


@ignore
@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex fn
@end ignore

@contents
@bye
